# ws2812b_stm32F3
This is a fast implementation WS2812B library for STM32 processors.

The example is implemented for STM32F3 line with TIM2. It is possible to change the code to work based on other timer or STM F1, F2 or F4 line. This version is using STM HAL library.

The library is in the /src/ws2812b directory and example of init, redraw and effects are in src/visEffect.c file.

WS2812B has specific communication protocol and it is necessary to bend some standard peripherals to use this protocol. The most easy approach would be implement blocking cycle-exact code in assembly that will spit out ones and zeroes as we need. This is implemented in NeoPixel library for AVR and ARM processor.

Some improvements can be made if part of the bits are generated by some HW peripheral for example SPI or PWM. The best solution is to keep the CPU free and let the DMA and timer do the precise timing. So I've made some DMA tests and it appeared that I can use my code to precise generate necessary waveforms. The I looked around and discovered that this is the approach that already OctoWS2811 library is using. So at least I wasn't completely wrong. But I would like to have better lib.

The octo lib is great when you use lot of parallel strips. Because it can output data for all your 16 strips. On the other side if you use only 2 or 4 LED strips (outputs) then you are wasting your RAM because of the data organization in the library.

Based on your longest LED strip the library creates an array uint16_r buffer[NUMBER_OF_LEDS × 24]. So if you use one strip with ten LEDs then it creates the uint16_t array of length 240 (480 bytes) where only one bit of each item in array is used. So you are wasting 93% of your array in RAM. If you have LED strip connected to the pin PB3 then the 3rd bit of each item in array is used. This is because DMA needs pre-processed data in specific format. I can do better.

##My library has few improvements:

### One separate buffer for your (big) framebuffer and second internal bitbuffer for DMA.
RGB framebuffer - this is one dimension array with {R1, G1, B1, R2, G2, B2, ...} format.
Bitbuffer - this is basicaly the same format buffer like the Octo2811 lib uses but it is allocated only for 2 LEDs (2 LEDs on each of 16 output channels)

**Here is the improvement.** I fill the bitbuffer on-the-fly in the double-buffering fashion based on DMA_HALF_TRANSFER and DMA_COMPLETE_TRANSFER interrupts. While the data to the first LED is fed, I prepare the next 24 bits in the second part of the bitbuffer for the second LED in the DMA Irq handler in the background. This IRQ bit-juggling was optimized so it's just a small overhead - I'll explain that down below. And while the data from the second part of bitbuffer is send to the second LED, the DMA Half transfer interrupt is fired and in it are prepared another 24 bit data for first LED.

### Bit-banding for bit-juggling in the IRQ
Interrupts has to be very fast. Thats why I tried many ways to "serialize" the bits from framebuffer to bitbuffer. The best solution is to use bit-banding (don't confuse with bit-banging). This is HW accelerated access to single bits in RAM and I've made a practical video some time ago https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h78DyF1NOio

Because the bits are computed on the background during the transmittion, there is little CPU overhead. For one LED strip it is on 64MHz STM32F3 just about 8% **only during** transmission of the data. The overhead is bigger as you use more parallel LED strips on the same port. It can be like 10% for two LEDs but it don't rise linearly. You have to take into account overhead of IRQ service routine, clearing IRQ bits. The bit-juggling with bit-banding implementation is quite efficient.


##Pros and Cons
Pros are when you use less paralel strips on the same GPIO port. You can efficiently use your RAM. But when you use more and more LED strips on the same port, the background overhead of bit-juggling takes more time and the CPU will be more busy. This applies only when you are sending data. If your update rate is 60FPS and you have plenty time between frames - you can do your CPU intensive computation between the LED transfers.

